good afternoon and welcome once again to
the Downing Street daily coronavirus
briefing I'm joined by Professor John
Newton who coordinates our work on
testing and by Professor Steve powers
who's the medical director of the NHS
every day we're working through our plan
to protect life and protect the NHS by
slowing the spread and building the
capacity so at all times the NHS has got
the capacity to give the very best care
to everybody who needs it in today's
briefing after setting out the daily
statistics I want to talk about testing
but before hand I'd like to share some
really good news
earlier this week I said that we are now
able to begin the restoration of NHS
services now that we passed the peak I
can tell you about the next step the
restoration of fertility services few
families have been untouched by the
amazing advances in fertility treatments
over the past generation and I know just
how time-sensitive fertility treatment
can be and how important it is for the
families affected and I know that this
treatment can change lives for the
better
forever so when I say thank you to all
of you everybody watching for staying at
home to protect the NHS of course I'm
saying thank you on behalf of the lives
that you're saving but I'm also saying
thanks on behalf of the lives that the
NHS can now once again help to create
because together we've protected the NHS
and we're now restoring the NHS and
restoring the chance for so many couples
to start a family
turning to the figures a hundred and
seventy-seven thousand four hundred and
fifty-four people
tested positive for coronavirus an
increase of 6201 since yesterday 15,000
111 people are currently in hospital
with corona virus and 27,000 510 people
have now sadly died across all settings
an increase of 739 as one will remember
them and treasure their memories this is
a virus that has a devastating impact on
families on friends on local communities
and right across government we're
working day and night to defeat it at
the beginning of last month at this
podium I set a goal that anyone who
needs a test should get a test and that
as a nation we should achieve a hundred
thousand tests per day by the end of the
month I knew that it was an audacious
goal but we needed an audacious goal
because testing is so important for
getting Britain back on our feet I can
announce that we have met our goal the
number of tests yesterday on the last
day of April was a hundred and twenty
two thousand three hundred and
forty-seven this unprecedented expansion
in British testing capability is an
incredible achievement but it is not my
achievement it is a national achievement
achieved by a huge team of people
working together and I tell you this the
testing capacity that we've built
together will help every single person
in this country testing is crucial to
suppress the virus I know from personal
experience to just how much people with
symptoms want to know if they've got the
disease I know that I did it helps
remove the worry it helps keep people
safe and it will help us to unlock the
lock down so many people have tragic
he died and the challenge that we still
face is vast but we're making real
progress I want to take a moment to
thank and pay tribute to the incredible
team who did this together and who
joined in one of the greatest national
mobilizations that we've seen we brought
together the best civil servants the
best minds from the private sector the
best scientists the best lab technicians
and the bests are the best in the armed
forces setting stretching ambitious
goals in a crisis has a galvanizing
effect on everybody involved it is a
mission if we haven't been so bold if we
chosen a safer easier path I just can't
see how we would have built the capacity
that we need in a few short weeks we've
created a new test for the virus in phe
we've built a network of regional
testing centers we've put a fleet of
mobile testing units on the road and
created home testing kits so if you
can't get to the test we can get the
test to you we've more than doubled the
capacity of NHS and public health
England labs and created three brand-new
mega labs to analyze the results so many
people have played a part in this work
British diagnostic companies like Rand
ox and Oxford nanopore and medical wire
and DNA nudge and Samba logistic
companies like the Royal Mail and yodel
who were brilliant and got us out of a
real hole this week academics like
Professor Derek crook and Sir John Bell
from Oxford and professor Eredar Zhai
from Imperial Deloitte and Boots who've
delivered our drive through centres
AstraZeneca GSK an oversight whose labs
go on stream next week public health
England and the NHS of course who've
pulled out all the stops professor
Sharon peacock professor John Newton and
the UK bio Centre and the Crick who set
up high tech laboratories and also it
wasn't just a national effort people
from across the world including thermo
Fisher illogic Abbott and Amazon from
the US
Kyah Jen from Germany and Ross from
Switzerland and this is how we did it
because everybody work together with
grit and determination to reach a shared
goal and they thrived because the team
contained diversity of perspectives of
backgrounds and critically a diversity
of thought and when things went wrong
which they did every single day believe
me we didn't ask who we could blame we
asked how we could fix it so to my team
I want to say you toil tirelessly night
and day and I'm so proud of what you
have achieved and to all of you on
behalf of government on behalf of the
whole country thank you as the Prime
Minister said a big big increase in
testing provides a way to unlock the
puzzle of coronavirus and testing forms
the first element of our plan to test
track and trace by mid-may will have an
initial 18,000 contact tracers in place
that work is underway as we speak
and if it needs to be bigger we'll scale
it as required
the combination of contact tracers and
new technology through our new covered
19 NHS app will help tell us where the
virus is spreading and help everyone to
control new infections people will be
able to know if they've been in close
contact with someone who's transmitting
the disease and take the action that
they need to our full-scale test track
and trace model will drive the infection
rate down and the lower the are and the
lower number of new infections the more
effective the track and trace system
will be tracking and tracing will allow
us to get our down and hold our down and
so it will allow us to lift lockdown
measures now this disease affects us all
indiscriminately we've seen that in
recent weeks we've had to impinge on
historic liberties to protect our NHS
and our loved ones and yet our goal must
be freedom freedom from the virus yes
and we will not lift measures until it
is safe to do so but also we care about
the restoration of social freedom and
economic freedom to each citizen's right
to do as they please
for now we're working together to stay
home we're impinging on the freedom of
all for the safety of all with this next
mission of test track and trace I'm
seeking a solution that allows us by
each other's participating to target the
measures that are needed with much more
precision and so to reassert as much as
is safely possible the liberty of us all
that is our next mission but for now the
most important thing for everyone to do
to keep our down and to get us all
through this is to maintain the spirit
and the resolve that's had such and
impact thus far so please stay at home
protect the NHS and save lives and now
professor Newton is going to set out
some more details of our own testing and
then I'm going to ask professor Powis
had to set out and take us through the
slides thank you very much secretary of
state um and kind of all say thank you
on behalf of the program for those kind
words of thanks it's been a truly
extraordinary collaboration but thank
you very much we have reached an
important milestone but I want to
explain why we need all this testing
back in March the country moved into
lockdown because the virus was
circulating widely not because we did
not have enough tests cases were popping
up with no obvious connection to other
cases and the infection was entering the
exponential growth phase and at that
point access to limitless testing even
if we had had it would have made no
difference the decision to enter
lockdown would have been the same and
would have been taken at the same time
in the same way the root out of lockdown
has not been blocked by low levels of
testing we can't relax social distancing
only when the government's five tests
are met and that means particularly
getting the infection
right down testing we'll sector status
mentioned help to keep it under control
once we're out of lockdown but our
levels of testing have not kept us in
lockdown a day longer
what about Germany people talk about
Germany a lot but yes Germany had a lot
of tests available from the get-go but
there was also a lot less virus around
in Germany when they introduced social
distancing and it was circulating in
younger people say as CMA pointed out in
an earlier briefing we should not rush
to draw conclusions about relationships
between numbers our tests available and
outcomes in different countries
nevertheless as CMO also said we are
learning from other countries and we
have learned from the experience of
other countries but back to the here and
now
where does all this leave us in the UK
well the hundred thousand tests add a
target was set for two purposes as
Sechrist eight has mentioned it was
intended to motivate the program and set
the scale of our ambition and it has
certainly done that more importantly
they perhaps we knew from our
calculations that we would need
something like this level of testing to
be ready for the next phase of the
response to the pandemic looking to the
future then we now have a very
substantial and flexible testing
capability in the UK it will be used to
drive extensive contact tracing to
control any new infections to help us
keep patients and staff safe in
hospitals and care services and to tell
us with some precision how the virus has
spread across the country and is
spreading in the future if we can
quickly identify who may have been in
contact with someone infected we can
prevent them from passing it on and so
drive down transmission rates of the
virus now the new NHS Act for contact
tracing is also in development and
making rapid progress and the more
people who sign up for the new app when
it goes live the better informed our
responses will be and the more effective
we will be in keeping the virus under
control all this progress with testing
and with our our design of the next
phase of contact tracing and the app
freeze ministers and their scientific
advisers to choose whatever future
strategies are best suited
to keep the country safe I can assure
you that the testing capability we have
built in the last few weeks is world
leading in its scale and sophistication
and gives us the flexibility we need as
the pandemic evolves we will have the
testing capacity to meet changing demand
across the country it is now there to
serve us all thank you thanks very much
John and professor Paz if you'll take us
through the slides
thank you very much Secretary of State
and good afternoon everybody so as I and
others have said on many occasions the
Magnificent response of the British
public to the government's request to
comply with social distancing
instructions has meant that we have
begun to get on top of this virus we've
seen the transmission rate the
reproduction rate fall to below 1 and
that means that the number of new
infections is falling within our
communities and that has meant that
pressure has been kept off the NHS the
NHS has responded magnificently to make
sure that patients have always had
available the treatment they require and
over time this will also has an impact
on the unfortunate number of deaths that
we've seen and as we move to the next
phase of managing kovat 19 I think first
thing I'd like to do is to remind
everybody of the five tests that the
government has set for adjusting the
current lockdown the first I've already
referred to and that's that the NHS
continues to have sufficient capacity to
provide the critical care requirements
that are needed but also specialist
treatment right across the UK secondly
it's that sustained and consistent fall
in Bayley debts from coronavirus and we
are beginning to see that but we need to
make sure that that is maintained
thirdly it's reliable data to show that
the rate of infection is decreasing to
manageable levels across the board and
again as I've said it's everybody's
efforts in complying with social
distancing that means that infections
have fallen and will continue to fall
fourthly this has been a challenge not
just in the UK but globally
around the operational response to a
pandemic that includes PPE it includes
other things and moving forward we need
to ensure that those challenges testing
is one of them are in hand and that we
are in a good position going forward to
meet future do not demand and finally
and and and critically that any
adjustments going forward don't risk a
second wave a second peak of infections
that again runs a risk of overwhelming
our health systems so those are the five
key tests that have been set and the
government will be looking to be
confident that it is met those before it
moves to the next phase of the lockdown
and the measures that we will need to
take going forward to stay on top of
this virus and ensure infection rates
remain low now in the next slide we will
provide I'm providing some details of
exactly how the British public have
complied and the first is an example on
how people have been approaching contact
particularly with vulnerable people over
a period in the middle part of April
showing that eighty five four percent
the the great majority of adults have
said they'd either not left their home
or only left their home from permitted
reasons and maybe seven percent of
adults avoiding contact with older or
vulnerable people so a great great
testament to the efforts that a brief
public have gone to to ensure that we
reduce infections and then on the right
of this slide some information on the
number of people who have been working
at home since social distancing measures
were introduced and that's forty four
five percent of adults in employment
saying that they work at home and that
compares to around twelve percent of
last year so again a great increase in
those that are not going out that are
staying at home and a managing to work
without having to go in a usual place of
work and on the third slide we begin to
see the testing information the secular
states said as both secretary and John
have said the number of tests
I have increased dramatically but it's
not just the fact the numbers have
increased it's the fact that capacity is
increased so that we can use testing for
a far far wider range of purposes and
you have already heard some of the areas
in which that is going to be critical
going forward in the months ahead in the
fourth slide we show the new cases as
determined by positive tests you will
see that that has increased a bit in
recent days but that should be seen in
the context that we have increased the
number of tests in the round so more
testing and more testing of different
groups of individuals is likely to bring
more positive tests as a result but
overall I think the number is relatively
stable and that is a good sign and
reflects that the level of infection is
falling in the next slide we then move
to people who unfortunately and again
it's a mild illness for the great
majority of people but for a proportion
who do have to be admitted to hospital
you can see that since the middle of
April numbers of people in hospital with
curve in 19 have been falling and that's
particularly marked in London that was
ahead in terms of the infection rate and
though therefore that fall has come
quickest in London it is starting to
move down maybe at a slower level in
other regions of the UK but nevertheless
overall the trend is ease downwards and
then that also translates in the next
slide to people who again small minority
but important group that have to be
treated in our critical care facilities
this shows the proportion of people with
kovat 19 in critical care beds and again
that is falling in the Four Nations and
the absolute number of people in
critical care beds are not just the
percentage but the absolute number is
also declining and then finally we move
unfortunately to deaths the beside
deaths that have occurred and again we
are talking we're now showing deaths in
all settings we were previously up until
a few days ago showing deaths in
hospital settings we've now expanded
this and again you see those numbers do
from day to day and there's a reporting
lag at the weekend but overall the
seven-day rolling average which smooths
out those daily that daily variation is
showing that the number of deaths is
beginning to trend downwards and then
very finally we show the usual
international comparison against other
countries and again this comes with the
usual caveat that this sort of
comparison is really important it's now
UK all settings but the real comparison
is in all cause mortality so in excess
deaths in countries that is measured
more more consistently between countries
but there will be some time before that
analysis can be done so although it's
important to show this data I think it's
important to remember that it will be a
number of months and perhaps longer
before we can see the true comparison
between our countries so finally to
remind people that the hardships we've
been going through the compliance with
social distancing is working the key
thing is it needs to continue to work so
we all must continue to not think that
this is over this is really the
beginning but it is translating into
benefits in pressure on the NHS and on a
reduction in death so it's important
that we all keep it up thank you thanks
very much Steve
so the first question is going to be
from Andrew from Leeds who joins us by
video hello my question is when lockdown
restrictions are lifted and schools open
will there be fines if people choose to
keep their children off school even if
it's open for their age group and also
how will you make sure the public is
confident it's safe
well thanks Andrew that's a really
important question the our aim is that
when it is safe to do so
then we'll make recommendations of
changes like this but we'll only do it
when it's safe to do so
so we are not going to reopen schools if
it isn't safe now of course the
this disease thankfully doesn't appear
to give children symptoms nearly as bad
as as adults so it is much much much
safer for children and maybe and
professor powers you can add something
on that but we will not reopen until
it's safe to do so so that's on your
second question on the first question of
course you know as and when we reopen
schools our goal is to get back to the
the norm and the position as it was
before and I'm pretty I'm confident that
because we'll only do it when it's when
it's safe then it will at that point
then be entirely reasonable and and
become normal again to send your
children to school yes so I think a
secretary said it's perfectly correct
that that this virus affects children a
much less than it does the elderly and
older adults so they are much less
affected by the effects of having
covered 19 that have as we said the last
time we were here there have been some
very rare reports about complications in
children we are continuing to look for
that and try and understand if there is
any link but the overall message is for
children this is a mild disease always
one that produces very little symptoms
the science is still evolving in terms
of transmission between children so we
do need to be cautious as we think about
opening schools and we will need to
think carefully and advise the
government appropriate advice as to how
that might happen but the key thing is
that this is not a serious disease for
the vast vast vast majority of children
and indeed younger people in fact it's
important to remember isn't it that the
reason that we had to take the decision
to close schools was because of the
impact of schools on transmission not on
the safety of children exactly and
that's important to bear in mind and I
hope I hope reassuring Andrew and the
next question is from Stewart from
redditch and Stuart
given the large investment that's gone
into creating the Nightingale hospitals
will we make use of them going forward
to help reduce NHS waiting lists at the
right time as we come through the
pandemic and the answer to your question
Stuart is that we will do what we need
to do to reduce NHS waiting lists as we
reopen the NHS but the nightingales were
designed very specifically for patients
who are who are intubated and therefore
who are under anaesthetic so they are
specifically designed for kovat but
Steve you were you you were behind that
project so maybe you can set out yes so
seco state is quite right the
nightingale hospitals have been designed
with specific purposes in mind the X the
Nightingale Center in East London
created in order to be used if we needed
extra capacity for ventilated patients
fortunately we have used the Nightingale
in London but fortunately we have
managed that surge because of the the
compliance the British public has shown
to social distancing so the NHS has done
a great job but those hospitals are
designed in a particular way for a
particular purpose and that doesn't
necessarily mean that they they would be
fit for purpose for other type of NHS
activity now of course we also need to
keep them as an insurance policy in the
in the next month or two
because we need to be confident as I
said in the five tests that we that we
have a sustained reduction in hospital
admissions but of course we will always
keep things under review going forward
but I think the key thing is that the
night-air the nightingales have shown
quite how agile the NHS can be with the
support of the military if we need to be
but I think of giving us that extra
capacity that we have used but haven't
had to use to the extent that we might
have feared even just at the beginning
of April thanks very much and Thank You
Stuart for submitting your question
remember that you can submit a question
by going on to gov dot UK forward slash
ask
and I think these questions from the
public are are a great addition to our
daily briefings and we're now turn to
questions from the media and the first
one is from hue p.m. of the BBC thank
you very much
Secretary of State as you said that's
clearly been a rapid and impressive
expansion of lab capacity and testing
centers and businesses and staff are
putting a huge effort and fully
deserving of praise I wanted to ask a
little more about where we go from here
in your view you touched on it but a
little more detail how do you intend to
further develop and expand the testing
network as part of moves to combat the
virus well that's a really important
question Hugh I tried to set out a bit
of it but I think there's two parts the
first is that we've grown this testing
capacity to to over a hundred thousand
hundred and twenty-two thousand tests
done yesterday and that's for a purpose
because by testing you can help to treat
patients better we've always been
testing patients you can help get people
back to work and there's been a big
expansion of the eligibility to get a
test in order to be able to get back to
work and also for surveys and very soon
we should get the first results of the
surveys that are out in the field at the
moment so that we know how many people
have the disease right across the
country
and and we should get those results very
soon we plan to continue to expand
capacity as I said there's a there's a
new lab coming on stream next week that
AstraZeneca and GSK have put together in
Cambridge and and we'll keep going from
there but the other really important
question is making sure we use this
capacity in the best way possible for
instance to have a real focus on care
homes to make sure that we can tackle
the tackle be the epidemic within care
homes as well John thank you and yes so
it is an extraordinary achievement to
build this currency so quickly there is
an element of consolidation required now
we need to move to a more sustainable
footing and we also need to try and
integrate the work of the new
laboratories with the existing
infrastructure so for example making
sure that the results flow back to
general practitioners and so on so all
of that is happening and that will that
will really help us to use this new
capacity to its maximum benefit and then
a secre state said there are a whole
range of other opportunities to support
the NHS the care sector and also other
sectors such as criminal justice by
making testing available and I think the
really exciting development is this
rollout of testing at home which of
course would be very very helpful for
any contact tracing a really flexible
fast way of getting tests to people when
we're using our contact tracing track
and trace app and so on so we're very
pleased with what we've done so far but
it really is only a start and we do need
to apply what we have now to the to the
challenges of the future thank you very
much yeah if you've got a follow up here
is that just one more yeah you ensure
that health and care workers do get
priorities yeah they can get tested when
they need to be yes absolutely this is
really important the within the system
that we've built if health and care
workers need a test then they can get
one as a priority either through the NHS
itself and the NHS is own labs or
through the employer route so they can
essentially go to the front of the queue
in terms of getting an appointment to
one of the drive-thru centres or and and
and that's and that's an important part
of making sure we have the right
prioritization we've always talked about
the prioritization starting with
patients and then people in the NHS then
why do key workers and then the general
public and that prioritization is built
into the system just to build on this
point of testing for contact tracing
thing is once we have contact tracing in
large scale then you want to be able to
test people as soon as possible so that
you know if there's a pause
to test so then the people they've been
in close contact with can could be
advised to act accordingly and and and
isolate so that they don't pass on the
disease so that is a very important
other new part of the priority within
testing once we once we get that up and
running by the middle of the month
thanks you
Sam coats from sky um Matt Hancock um
the hundred and twenty-two thousand test
is a massive increase in a short period
of time our home testing kits that were
mailed out yesterday but haven't
actually be yet returned and analyzed by
labs because earlier in the week number
ten was indicating that they wouldn't
count against the target but now it does
seem as if they do to John Newton and
perhaps this morning we got the news
that we've been waiting for that you
cannot get coronavirus a second time
that seems to have come out of a study
from the South Korea central Clinical
Committee for emerging disease control
how much weight do you put on that
seemingly important study and Steve
house was interested that you were
seeming to be quibble quibbling with a
colleague at public health England dr.
Akaka recce who was saying yesterday
that children don't seem to be able to
transmit the disease was she wrong right
well what a feast of questions I will
I'll hand over to John to answer the
precise numerical questions we set out
on got UK exactly how we count the
different types of tests for different
reasons because obviously as exactly as
you said in the question home tests are
are produced in a different way to the
tests at drive-thru centres so John can
take us through the exact breakdown of
the one hundred and twenty two thousand
three hundred and forty seven tests
yesterday I just add that in total we
now over the entire testing program
since the test was invented have done
over a million tests now one million
twenty three thousand eight hundred and
twenty four and so that's another
another benchmark that we've managed to
reach John and then I'll ask Steve to
answer the question
about the transmissibility of the
disease amongst children yeah thank you
sector states so the NHS public health
England's laboratory is including the
varieties in other countries all four
countries of the UK undertook 39
thousand seven hundred and fifty three
tests between them of which there were
two thousand five hundred and
thirty-seven in Scotland a thousand and
ninety in Wales and 1319 in north Niland
and it's worth mentioning we have a
partnership with Roche and that
partnership they undertook 13,700 23
tests so the benefit of the
public/private partnerships um the tests
undertaken by the new lighthouse
laboratories total seventy nine thousand
five hundred and twenty two now of those
thirty nine thousand one hundred fifty
three were undertaken in the drive
through centers or in by mobile units or
in fact by research nurses who
administered tests as part of the Office
of National Statistics survey your
question the home kits delivered there
were 27 thousand four hundred and ninety
seven kits delivered and there were
twelve thousand eight hundred seventy
two tests delivered through the
satellite process and then under the
surveillance testing which is a
different which is the antibody testing
there were three thousand and seventy
two tests undertaken and so that's the
breakdown of the total 122 so your
question was about home kits twenty
seven thousand and then there were
twelve thousand more that were sent out
of satellites thanks very much Asti
thanks Ann so it's on the question of
transmission in children I'll say what I
think the position is John were these
public health expertise will correct me
if I get any of this this wrong I think
if a child or a young person is
symptomatic then there's no reason to
think that they wouldn't transmit the
virus in the way that any other person
who's symptomatic would be I think the
big question is how many children don't
have symptoms but get the virus and in
that particular case or in those cases
how transmissible is the virus between
and I think that is data that we are
still accumulating and evidence that we
are still learning about and of course
it is one of the key questions when it
comes to schools and and how schools are
opened again so I think that true answer
is that the evidence is still emerging
over the transmitted ability of virus in
children that don't show symptoms but
Joan is that your understanding
absolutely and should I pick up the
question on immunity can you get the you
mentioned that a study the science on
immunity is still emerging and I think
the general rule is that you would never
make a decision based on a single study
so we would very much want to see that
result replicated in other studies
before we decided to that that was that
was really the case but it's obviously
promising I think it's people have said
before in this in these briefings it
would be it would be very surprising if
there was no immunity after an infection
but at the moment I think the science is
still not precise about how much
immunity you get and how long it lasts
so but nevertheless results such as the
one you mentioned are encouraging thanks
very much Sam Victoria McDonald from
Channel 4 News Secretary of State could
I just say that I'm not quite sure that
Sam's question was answered there was a
report in the hsj that previously a test
would be counted only once the sample of
being processed but that that testing
has now changed and that it's being
countered once it's been posted out is
that the case and then secretary of
states I wanted to ask you specifically
the ONS figures today show that you are
twice as likely to die from covert 19 if
you live in a deprived part of the
country what is your reaction to that
and what policy implications does that
have for you yes John Town so the the
point from the hsj but it's not
something I recognize and the the the
point on the deprivation and and the
point that in more deprived parts of the
country that appears to be greater
impact
and this is something that we are
worried about and looking at and we're
looking at it in the context of all of
the different the different ways in
which this disease seems to have a
different impact on different groups so
it right from the start we've known that
it has a much more serious impact on
older people it appears to have a bigger
impact on men it appears to have a
bigger impact on people from black black
and minority ethnic backgrounds
it appears that people who are obese are
more seriously affected by the disease
and there's also this new evidence from
the Office for National Statistics of
the correlation with with deprivation so
we are looking at all of these things
and trying to understand the impact of
the virus as much as we possibly can as
and when we get new evidence John yeah
so there's been no change to the way
tests are counted as we've developed new
ways of delivering tests we've taken
advice from officials as to how they
should be counted so the tests that are
within the control of the program which
is the great majority are counted when
the tests are undertaken in our
laboratories but for any test which goes
outside the control of the program
they're counted when they leave the
program so that's the tests that are
mailed out to people at home and the
tests that's going out in the satellite
so that's that's the way they are
counted have always been counted and the
way we were advised to count on them by
officials that's all set out on gov dot
uk'
Sam Lister from the Express Thank You
health secretary I'm concerns have been
raised about how the over seventies have
been treated as one blanket group during
this crisis including by senior figures
in your party can you reassure over
seventies who are fit and healthy but
what they were treated exactly the same
as the rest of the population
when lockdown measures are eased and
also it's been made clear today that
this is not over but now we are
the peak people will obviously rightly
be hopeful they can start making plans
to see family and friends again
pups even have a holiday or
you know meet up together to have a
holiday together is is the is like
summer a realistic timescale for this
well Sam the love that the last question
is very tempting to to speculate at but
unfortunately we just don't know it's
still too early to say and I'm really
sorry to have to give that answer but it
is the five tests we've set out are
they're partly to try to give everybody
a sense of when we'll be able to make
those next decisions that I know people
are yearning for but we will only lift
the lockdown measures when it's safe to
do so this is why test track and race is
so important because it will help us to
do that it isn't a it isn't necessary to
have that in place but it helps
enormously and it's but it is as of
today too soon and hence the message
remains to stay at home because that
protects the NHS and saves lives and on
your first point about the over-over 70s
maybe I'm Steeve agnostic you are to ask
this but there are we were always clear
from the start there's a very specific
group who we've been in contact with who
we're asking to shield which is ensure
that they have as little contact as
possible with other people for their own
health reasons and and after that the
question is a degree a gradation of the
of the advice Steve yes so of course we
know as you know that that the over 70s
can be absolutely fit and healthy and
that you know that it's it's it's not
the case that everybody over 70 has a
chronic health condition or an
underlying disease as a secretary of
state said we very specifically asked a
group of individuals some of whom are in
that age bracket but not everybody to
shield and to do everything they could
to stay at home because we we knew that
their underlying
conditions put the more risk of serious
complications from kovat 19 so that's
the group that is being shielded of
course everybody is complying with
social distancing measures at the moment
and being asked to stay at home whatever
age you are so so in the generality at
the moment everybody is in that same
boat of complying with those measures I
think as we look forward and as I said
at the very start the government moves
to another combination of measures
including track and trace that will help
us keep the infection under control
going forward I think it's a perfectly
reasonable question to say how would
that work in in sort of age groups and
age bands and and although we do know
that the complications and unfortunately
deaths are more common in the elderly
even without complications I think
that's for consideration and that's work
I think that we will need to do as we
move forward but but I think your point
is very well made
thanks very much Sam Alan Preston from
the Belfast Telegraph a good afternoon
and I just have two quick questions for
the health secretary and Northern
Ireland the impact of coronavirus has
not been quite as severe compared to the
rest of the UK due to factors like a
lower population density do you think
there's any merit in eventually easing
restrictions here at a different pace to
other parts of the UK and my second
question and as this virus does not
respect borders do you think it would be
better for Stormont to work on an All
Ireland basis in fighting the pandemic
rather than following the UK lead well
thank you the the the thing is that
across the UK the level you write that
the level of the virus has been
different in different parts of the
country when we saw that in the chart
earlier that in in London the levels
been much higher in other parts of the
country lower but what's interesting is
that the shape of the of the curve and
the rise and then the fall and the virus
that's just started
has been basically the same throughout
the country and so that means that
moving together I think was the right
approach at the start and I can see the
the case that could be made and of
course the decisions that are devolved
we respect the devolution settlement but
ultimately if you look at the shape of
the curve getting our down and getting
the level of new cases right down that's
happened and the UK together
of course the relationship with the
Republic is important as well and we
have and we have good relations in terms
of both at political level but also at
medical level in conversations with the
Republic with the decisions that that
they take but we have very intensive
discussions within the UK about the
timing of changes within the country
thanks very much as Steve Ford from the
nursing times in good afternoon a
nursing time survey has indicated almost
all nursing staff feeling more stressed
and anxious than usual and a third
described the state of their mental
health is bad during the coab in
nineteen crisis for reasons reasons
including bpa shortages so my question
is what are you going to do in the long
term to protect the mental health of
nurses and other staff on top of the
help lines that have already been
announced as we as we already have a
well documented nurse shortage and I
hope you'd agree that we can't afford to
lose any more in the coming months and
secondly what's your message for black
and minority ethnic staff you feel they
may have been put at greater risk given
the emerging evidence from the mortality
data thank you very much Steve and I
think that the the way that nurses
across the NHS have risen to this
challenge has been admirable the bravery
and the flexibility that nurses have
shown right across the NHS and I think
that's something that the whole country
recognizes it and I recognise it as
health secretary I think that certainly
the measures that we have put in place
and to help people with
this stress and more serious mental
ill-health as a result of work are those
measures are important and I'm very glad
that they're in place I've been trying
to get them in place for some time and
we managed to put in place very quickly
as the as the crisis began but the other
thing it's undoubtedly true when you
talk to nurses on the frontline that
increasing the number of nurses so that
there are more to do the work that's
needed is a really important part of the
part of the plan and as you know we
committed in the election to 50,000 more
nurses by the end of the Parliament we
remain committed to that in fact we see
more nurses come into the NHS over the
both you know over the autumn and then
also as a result direct result of the
appeal for nurses who'd left the
profession to come back so we have got
more nurses in back into the NHS and I
want to support and cherish every single
nurse who works in the NHS because of
the important work that they do and and
so I'm sure that would be a big
conversation as we as we restore the NHS
and thank everybody for the work they've
done during the join the difficulties of
coronaviruses Steve I don't know if you
want to know I think I think your point
again is a very good point and of course
it's not just nurses as you pointed out
yourself it's it's all staff has been a
tremendous effort by staff across the
NHS they have been working incredibly
hard some some times in different areas
from where they usually work and of
course that that brings its own stresses
and I know talking to the chief execs
and the medical director chief
executives and medical directors of many
of our hospital trusts across the
country that as we begin to now stand up
some of the services that we had to
stand down to manage this surge in
coronavirus patients those those leaders
locally are thinking very hard about how
they supports that because they
absolutely recognise that they have gone
through a very challenging and at times
very stressful
number of weeks and that support is
required both in the short-term and over
a longer period of time to ensure as we
move back towards a normal but be
completely back to normal while we still
have kovat but back towards normal that
staff have the support they need so I
think the comment you've made are very
much reflected in the comments I hear
from our leaders across the health
system maybe you could answer Zeus
second question as well second quite
sorry the second question just remind me
the second question was Steve right yes
message for black and minority ethnic
star and John might want to answer some
of this as well so so I think the
message for like a minority staff is
that we absolutely recognize as a
secular state said earlier that this
virus is disproportionately affecting
affecting staff and I absolutely know
the concern in the worry amongst amongst
our colleagues in in in those groups and
in fact I've been talking to them over
the last few weeks as I'm sure secresy
and others have so there are things that
we can do in terms of supporting staff
and in helping them through the concerns
that they have I think there's another
piece of work that John will be able to
talk about which is to understand why it
is and again second state touched on
this a little bit earlier why it is that
the virus seems to be disproportionately
affecting members of staff and the
population at all from particular ethnic
groups so that work is ongoing and
public health England and I think maybe
John will be able to say a little bit
because of course that will also inform
what we need to do in the approach we
need to take going forward John thank
you yes so as we know the statistics do
show increased rates in some people with
some if they might think backgrounds the
effects are relatively small and they do
need to be looked at though although
very important but we do need to also
look at some of the other aspects of the
virus say for example the virus is
present in different race in different
parts of the country and we know that
that the different parts of the country
have very different groups of people
from different backgrounds so we used
all of these figures together to try and
understand what's really going on and so
there is there is cause for concern
definitely and we are talking to NHS
England about any advice that should be
given based on the data but there is
also an important bit of statistical
work to be done to try and understand
what the what the real underlying risks
are and I think it's at some times it
you know it can be wrong to take these
statistics at face value we also know
that unfortunately some different ethnic
groups have different levels of
underlying health conditions so for
example people from an Asian background
tend to do have more diabetes and so
we're trying to look at to what extent
those factors might be a player as well
but but it is a it's a very important
issue one that a number of people are
looking at public having them but also
number of university groups are also
studying this and we're feeding the
results back to NHS England so that
staff can get the right advice as you
exactly as you say but but I think it's
important for us to emphasize that we
don't need to wait for that day to that
data and analysis is important but we
don't need to wait for that to provide
additional support and in fact when
Simon Stephens chief executive of the
NHS wrote out - - to our healthcare
organisations to hospitals this week we
he made a specific point of ensuring
that local healthcare leaders do pay a
particular attention to supporting and
do whatever they feel is necessary
locally to support our pame colleagues
and I know from even today talking to
some of those local leaders that they
are absolutely doing that and providing
that support thanks very much Steve does
that answer your questions yes thank you
thanks very much indeed everybody that
concludes this daily coronavirus
briefing thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News